{\rtf1\ansi\uc1\deff0\deflang1024
{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}
{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Arial;}
{\f2\fnil\fcharset0 Arial;}
{\f3\fnil\fcharset0 Courier New;}
{\f4\fnil\fcharset0 Zapf Chancery;}
{\f5\fnil\fcharset0 STIXGeneral;}
}
{\colortbl;
\red0\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue255;
}
{\stylesheet
{\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
{\cs10 \additive\ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\s1\qc\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40 \sbasedon0\snext0 Part;}
{\s2\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}
{\s3\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 2;}
{\s4\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 3;}
{\s5\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 4;}
{\s6\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 5;}
{\s7\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 6;}
{\s8\qr\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext8 rightpar;}
{\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext9 centerpar;}
{\s10\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext10 leftpar;}
{\s11\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equation;}
{\s12\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationNum;}
{\s13\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationAlign;}
{\s14\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationAlignNum;}
{\s15\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationArray;}
{\s16\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationArrayNum;}
{\s17\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 theorem;}
{\s18\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 bitmapCenter;}
{\s20\qc\sb240\sa240\b\f0\fs36 \sbasedon0\snext21 Title;}
{\s21\qc\sa120\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 author;}
{\s22\ql\tqc\tx4536\tqr\tx9072\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext22 footer;}
{\s23\ql\tqc\tx4536\tqr\tx9072\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext23 header;}
{\s30\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 caption;}
{\s31\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 Figure;}
{\s32\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext32 Table;}
{\s33\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext33 Tabular;}
{\s34\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext34 Tabbing;}
{\s35\qj\li1024\ri1024\fi340\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext35 Quote;}
{\s38\ql\widctlpar\f3\fs20 \snext38 verbatim;}
{\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext46 List;}
{\s47\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext47 List 1;}
{\s50\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 latex picture;}
{\s51\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 subfigure;}
{\s61\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext62 bibheading;}
{\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext62 bibitem;}
{\s64\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext64 endnotes;}
{\s65\ql\fi-113\li397\lin397\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext65 footnote text;}
{\s66\qj\fi-170\li454\lin454\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext66 endnote text;}
{\cs62\super \additive\sbasedon10 footnote reference;}
{\cs63\super \additive\sbasedon10 endnote reference;}
{\s67\ql\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext67 acronym;}
{\s70\qc\sa120\b\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext71 abstract title;}
{\s71\qj\li1024\ri1024\fi340\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 abstract;}
{\s80\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 contents_heading;}
{\s81\ql\li425\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb240\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20\b \sbasedon0\snext82 toc 1;}
{\s82\ql\li512\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext83 toc 2;}
{\s83\ql\li1024\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext84 toc 3;}
{\s84\ql\li1536\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext85 toc 4;}
{\s85\ql\li2048\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext86 toc 5;}
{\s86\ql\li2560\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext86 toc 6;}
}
{\info
{\title Original file was proposal.tex}
{\doccomm Created using latex2rtf 2.3.8 r1240 (released June 16 2014) on Thu Oct  2 23:40:05 2014
}
}
{\footer\pard\plain\f0\fs20\qc\chpgn\par}
\paperw12280\paperh15900\margl2680\margr2700\margt2540\margb1760\pgnstart0\widowctrl\qj\ftnbj\f0\aftnnar
{\pard\plain\s20\qc\sb240\sa240\b\f0\fs36\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Constraining clouds in large-scale models with satellite observations\par
\pard\plain\s21\qc\sa120\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Benjamin R. Hillman\par
\pard\plain\s21\qc\sa120\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 \chdate \par
\pard\plain\s3\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 1  Introduction and motivation\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Clouds are a key piece of the global climate system, but accurate modeling of clouds in large-scale models is difficult, and cloud feedbacks in global climate models (GCMs) are recognized as a primary contributor to inter-model differences in responses to climate forcings (e.g., {Cess et\~al.}, 1990; {Bony and Dufresne}, 2005; {Williams and Webb}, 2009; {Medeiros et\~al.}, 2008). \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Evaluating clouds in simulations of present day climate against observations provides a first-order test of their representation models. Satellite observations of clouds serve as a useful baseline for evaluation because they provide near global coverage and sample all meterological regimes. But comparisons of this sort can be challenging because the quantities measurable from space are different from those that can be simulated by models. While models can diagnose cloud properties directly (e.g., cloud fraction, cloud height, cloud liquid and ice water content, particle size, etc.), satellite retrievals must infer these quantities from measured radiances using inversion techniques. Cloud properties retrieved by these techniques can often carry large uncertainties and inherent biases due to the challenges and limitations of the instruments and inversions (e.g., {Marchand et\~al.}, 2010; {Pincus et\~al.}, 2012).\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Satellite instrument simulators such as those available in the Cloud Feedback Model Intercomparison Project (CFMIP; {Bony et\~al.}, 2011) Observation Simulator Package (COSP; {Bodas-Salcedo et\~al.}, 2011) have emerged as a means to account for the limitations of satellite retrievals, thereby enabling more consistent comparisons between satellite observations of clouds and model representations of clouds (e.g., {Klein and Jakob}, 1999; {Bodas-Salcedo et\~al.}, 2011; {Zhang et\~al.}, 2005; {Marchand and Ackerman}, 2010; {Kay et\~al.}, 2012; {Klein et\~al.}, 2013; {Pincus et\~al.}, 2012). The purpose of the simulators is to produce synthetic observations for specific high-level satellite observation products given a model atmospheric state. To the extent that the simulators accurately account for the limitations and features of the specific satellite retrievals, the resulting diagostics are taken to be directly comparable to the corresponding satellite data. But the performance of these simulators have seen little scrutiny ({Mace et\~al.}, 2010), and any remaining uncertainties and ambiguities in comparisons involving observations from satellites with satellite-simulated model diagnostics potentially undermines the robustness of the conclusions of such comparisons.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The goal of this research is to quantify uncertainties in comparisons between models and observations using instrument simulators and remove ambiguities in those comparisons that result from assumptions about the unresolved cloud and precipitation structure by providing an improved representation of that structure for use in both GCM radiation parameterizations and satellite instrument simulators. In doing so, the results of this research will lead to more robust model evaluation practices and greater confidence in diagnosed biases in model cloud statistics, and lead to future improvements in the way the small-scale cloud and precipitation properties are treated in global models.\par
\pard\plain\s3\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 2  Background\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Simulating satellite-observable retrieval products from GCM output using COSP is a three-part process. First, the mis-match in resolved scales between the satellite pixel and model resoluation is accounted for by downscaling the gridbox mean cloud properties (the subgrid generator). Second, the known limitations and features of the satellite retrieval products are emulated by appling algorithms that account for assumptions consistent with the individual satellite intruments and retrieval methodologies (the forward operators). Lastly, the subgrid-level simulator outputs are aggregated to produce statistical summaries consistent with the available satellite statistical summaries. There are two primary sources of uncertainty in this process: sensitivity of the simulated diagnostics to the statistical downscaling of the gridbox means, and inaccuracy or incompleteness in the simulator forward operators in accounting for limitations in the satellite retrievals.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The complexity of simulating the climate system and current computational resources limit GCM resolutions to tens or hundreds of kilometers, but clouds occur and vary on much smaller spatial scales. This means that traditional GCMs are unable to resolve individual clouds, and instead descriptions of clouds in GCMs are limited to large-scale statistical summaries of cloud properties (gridbox means). In order to account for the effect of overlapping multiple cloud layers on satellite retrievals, subcolumn profiles of individual cloud elements must be inferred from the gridbox means. This downscaling is done within COSP by generating an ensemble of subcolumns for each GCM gridbox that is consistent with the gridbox mean cloud properties. But the large-scale mean description of cloud properties alone is insufficient to uniquely specify how individual cloud elements should be distributed vertically and horizontally within the gridbox, and inferring subgrid structure depends on additional assumptions about how clouds in different layers should overlap and how cloud properties should be distributed within each gridbox.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Subgrid cloud fields in COSP are stochastically generated consistent with the overlap assumptions used in the radiative transfer parameterization that describe how individual clouds are assumed to align vertically. These are usually simple rules, such as the popular maximum-random overlap assumption ({Geleyn and Hollingsworth}, 1979) in which clouds in adjacent layers are assumed to overlap maximally (perfect correlation) and clouds in non-adjacent layers are assumed to overlap randomly (zero correlation). However, a number of studies have shown that this simple specification of overlap fails to capture the complexity of clouds in nature (e.g., {Hogan and Illingworth}, 2000; {Mace and Benson-Troth}, 2002; {Pincus et\~al.}, 2005; {Barker}, 2008) and can lead to substantial biases in calculated radiative fluxes and heating rates ({Barker et\~al.}, 1999; {Oreopoulos et\~al.}, 2012). Because the satellite simulators attempt to account for the effects of multiple overlapping cloud layers on the retrievals (such as screening of low clouds by high clouds) it is likely that the simulators will likewise be sensitive to assumptions about cloud overlap. Cloud properties (liquid and ice water contents and effective radii) are often assumed to be homogeneous over the entire cloudy portion of model gridboxes, but studies have shown that this assumption is also inappropriate and leads to errors in radiative fluxes and heating rates ({Barker et\~al.}, 1999; {Oreopoulos et\~al.}, 2012). The sensitivity of simulated satellite-observable diagnostics to this unresolved variability has not been evaluated, but it is likely to be important as well especially for quantities with a non-linear dependence on cloud properties (e.g., radar reflectivity). Radar reflectivity is also highly sensitive to precipitation, and radar reflectivity simulated by COSP will likely to be sensitive to the treatment of precipitation overlap and variability as well (e.g., {{Di Michele} et\~al.}, 2012). Sensitivity to these assumptions would imply that inaccurate assumptions about the unresolved scales in models could lead to inaccurate conclusions about the simulated cloud statistics even if a model is capable of accurately diagnosing the large-scale mean cloud properties, thus undermining conclusions reached in model-observation comparisons.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Inaccurately or incompletely accounting for the limitations of satellite retrievals is another potential source of ambiguity in model evaluations. Satellite simulators have been used extensively in global model evaluations (e.g., {Kay et\~al.}, 2012; {Klein et\~al.}, 2013), but often without a rigorous validation of the simulators themselves ({Mace et\~al.}, 2010). A danger in using simulators to remove ambiguities in comparisons between models and observations lies in naively assuming that all ambiguities are removed in these comparisons, and that differences between observed and simulated cloud statistics therefore represent actual model biases and not just unaccounted for observational biases. An evaluation of the MISR and ISCCP simulators is proposed in the following section to quantify these uncertainties. \par
\pard\plain\s3\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 3  Proposed work\par
\pard\plain\s4\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb180 \fi0 3.1  Evaluation of ISCCP and MISR simulators\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 The ISCCP and MISR simulators take profiles of a model atmospheric state and attempt to determine the cloud top height and column cloud optical depth that would be retrieved by the satellite. It is assumed that if the inputs are correct, then the cloud top height and optical depth calculated by the simulator will be representative of what the satellite would retrieve. But the performance of the simulators in accurately accounting for the limitations of the satellite retrievals has not been extensively tested and documented.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {Mace et\~al.} (2010) performed a preliminary evaluation of the ISCCP simulator by using as input extinction and atmospheric profiles derived from ground-based data at the Atmospheric Radiation Measurement program (ARM) Southern Great Plains (SGP) site and comparing the simulated cloud top pressure and optical depth with collocated ISCCP retrievals. The results of their study suggest that the ISCCP simulator brings the diagnosed cloud top pressure from ARM measurements closer to those retrieved from ISCCP, indicating that the simulator reasonably accounted for features in the ISCCP retrieval of cloud top pressure. However, differences between the ISCCP-retrieved and ISCCP-simulated cloud top pressure remained unaccounted for, and the simulator fails to account for biases in ISCCP-retrieved cloud optical depths. \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 While the {Mace et\~al.} (2010) study provides a first-step toward identifying ambiguities in the simulator forward operators, the results are limited to a single geographic site (which severely limits the meteorology and cloud regimes sampled), and only evaluates the performance of the ISCCP simulator. Remaining differences between the simulated and retrieved ISCCP cloud top pressure also suggest that more work should be done to understand the uncertainties in these comparisons, and in simulated diagnostics from the MISR and MODIS simulators as well. A similar analysis technique will be employed here to evaluate the performance and sensitivity of the ISCCP and MISR simulator over a larger geographic region, and to evaluate multi-layer statistics such as those described in {Marchand et\~al.} (2010) and {Marchand and Ackerman} (2010).\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 An evaluation of the simulators over a broader geographic region and a greater diversity of cloud regimes is proposed. Extending the analysis technique used by {Mace et\~al.} (2010) is dependent on being able to obtain the needed inputs with high confidence, which include profiles of extinction, temperature, relative humidity, and visible and infrared radiances. Satellite measurements are an attractive option for the source of these inputs because they provide data with large spatial coverage, enabling an evaluation across a large diversity of cloud regimes in different geographic regions. The CloudSat cloud profiling radar ({Stephens et\~al.}, 2002) and the CALIPSO lidar ({Winker et\~al.}, 2007) have proven to be capable of accurately retrieving profiles of hydrometeor layers {Mace et\~al.} (2009), and {Mace and Wrenn} (2013) describe a method for deriving extinction profiles from a combination of observations from CloudSat, CALIPSO, and MODIS. Temperature and relative humidity profiles are taken from ECMWF reanalysis mapped to the CloudSat orbit and height bins. {Mace and Wrenn} (2013) use these as inputs to the ISCCP simulator in order to characterize the different types of hydrometeor profiles that can be categorized into the different ISCCP CTP-OD histogram bins. But these profiles also allow evaluation of the ISCCP simulator against ISCCP observations, and the analysis can be naturally extended to include the MISR simulator and observations.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 While deriving the inputs to the simulators from other satellite data enables an evaluation over a larger geographic range, it also introduces other challenges: {\par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 1.\tab
Because the satellites from which the inputs are the derived and the satellites for which simulated-observations are to be evaluated are in different orbits, it is impossible to compare the simulated observations directly for each individual profile. Instead, only aggregated statistics (over a given region and time period) will be comparable. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 2.\tab
Uncertainties are introduced into the analysis by using satellite-retrieved cloud properties. CloudSat and CALIPSO are able to characterize the structure of hydrometeor layers accurately, but microphysical retrievals from radar reflectivity measurements can carry large uncertainties due to the presence of precipitation. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 3.\tab
The {Mace and Wrenn} (2013) retrieval uses MODIS column optical depths to constrain the extinction profiles. But the MODIS optical depth retrieval is known to be biased due to the limitations of 1D radiative transfer and the sampling restrictions of the MODIS retreival ({Pincus et\~al.}, 2012). Because MISR uses a similar optical depth retrieval that is also limited by 1D radiative transfer ({Marchand et\~al.}, 2010), the optical depth will likely be similarly biased, and any significant differences will likely be due to the sampling issues with the MODIS clear-sky restoral. This limits the evaluation to the simulation of cloud top height. \par
}\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi300 After deriving the extinction profiles, the analysis technique is straightforward. The derived profiles will be used as inputs to the MISR and ISCCP simulators along with thermodynamic profiles from ECMWF reanalysis mapped to the CloudSat orbit. Cloud top height output from the simulators will be aggregated for selected regions and time periods and compared to similarly aggregated MISR and ISCCP observations. The differences will be compared against the sampling uncertainties and the uncertainties arising from the two different retrieval techniques to determine where differences are significant. In order to further evaluate the uncertainties in the simulators, the thresholds used within the MISR simulator that determine where MISR is able to see through thin cloud layers will be adjusted within reasonable values and the differences in the outputs compared against the sampling uncertainties as well to determine the sensitivity to these choices.\par
\pard\plain\s4\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi0 3.2  Sensitivity of satellite-observable cloud diagnostics to unresolved cloud and precipitation structure\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 The sensitivity of COSP-simulated diagnostics to assumptions about unresolved cloud and precipitation structure can be evaluated by using fields with fully resolved cloud and precipitation structure as inputs to the simulators themselves, and then modifying the inputs to mimic the assumptions about overlap and variability used in GCMs. Outputs from the modified fields can then be compared to the outputs from the unmodified fields to quantify the sensitivity of the outputs to the assumptions mimicked by the modifications.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Options for the source of resolved cloud and precipitation properties is somewhat limited. Previous studies have used cloud resolving model (CRM) simulations in a similar manner to evaluate the sensitivity of radiative fluxes ({Barker et\~al.}, 1999; {Wu and Liang}, 2005), but this limits the analysis to the specific conditions represented by the case studies. A more comprehensive sampling of different meteorological regimes is obtained for this study by using output from the Multi-scale Modeling Framework (MMF; {Randall et\~al.}, 2003). The MMF replaces the cloud parameterizations in a traditional GCM with a 2D cloud resolving model in each gridbox. This provides global fields with resolved subgrid structure that can be passed directly to the individual instrument simulators within COSP. While these fields may not be perfectly accurate depictions of hydrometeor fields in nature, as long as the variability in these fields is reasonable they are sufficient for the purpose of evaluating the sensitivity of the diagnostics to the variability (perform comparison of overlap statistics and condensate PDFs compared to those derived from CloudSat to show that this is true?).\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 There are four main questions to be answered regarding sensitivity to subgrid cloud and precipitation structure: {\par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 1.\tab
Occurrence overlap: how important is the vertical correlation in cloud and precipitation occurence? \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 2.\tab
Heterogeniety: how important is local variability in cloud and precipitation condensate amount? \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 3.\tab
Condensate overlap: for heterogeneous condensate, how important is vertical correlation in condensate amount? \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 4.\tab
Phase overlap: how important is correlation between hydrometeors of different species (cloud and precipitation)? \par
}\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi300 To begin to answer these questions and to motivate the work to improve the representation of overlap and heterogeniety, the following set of modified MMF fields are passed as input to the simulators directly: {\par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
CRM: The original CRM fields within each gridbox of the MMF are used as inputs to the individual instrument simulators in COSP. This provides a baseline for comparison. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
CRM-AVG: hydrometeor mixing ratios are replaced with in-cloud averages, but the locations of hydrometeors (both cloud and precipitation) are retained from the full CRM fields. This set of modified fields mimics the layer homogeneous assumption, while retaining exact overlap. Any differences between this case and the full CRM case represent errors arising solely due to the assumption of homogeneous cloud and precipitation properties. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
CRM-RES: hydrometeor mixing ratios are resampled from the full distribution of mixing ratios from the CRM fields at each level, while again retaining the locations of hydrometeors from the full CRM fields. This modification tests the importance of condensate and phase overlap, since any vertical correlation in the original CRM condensate amount is destroyed by the resampling. \par
}\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi300 The above described simulations have been performed with a month of MMF output from the Super-Parameterized Community Atmosphere Model (SP-CAM). Preliminary results suggest that the simulated diagnostics are sensitive to condensate heterogeniety and condensate and phase overlap, as expected. While these simple tests are useful, they do not completely answer the questions posed above, and do not separate the sensitivity of the diagnostics to the different assumptions. That is, difference between the CRM-RES simulation and the CRM simulation arise due to both condensate and phase overlap errors. These simple simulations also do not test the sensitivity of the diagnostics to occurrence overlap. These questions will be revisited in the context of improvements in the treatment of subgrid cloud and precipitation structure in the following section.\par
\pard\plain\s4\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi0 3.3  Improving the representation of unresolved cloud and precipitation structure in large-scale models\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 The sensitivity of simulated satellite diagnostics identified in the previous section and the sensitivity of radiative fluxes and heating rates discussed in the background both motivate efforts to improve the representation of unresolved cloud and precipitation structure for use in radiative transfer parameterizations and in calculating satellite-observable diagnostics. This is the focus of this section, and the primary contribution of this research.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The development of the Monte Carlo Independent Column approximation (McICA; {Pincus et\~al.}, 2003) has opened the door for more complete treatments of the subgrid variability of cloud overlap and condensate amount by providing a computationally feasible means of computing radiative fluxes on stochastically generated subcolumns that sample different cloud states. {R{\'e4}is{\'e4}nen et\~al.} (2004) outline a subcolumn sampling strategy compatible with McICA that includes the ability to treat cloud occurrence and condensate overlap in a more flexible manner than has traditionally been used in GCMs. The {R{\'e4}is{\'e4}nen et\~al.} (2004) generator allows for \ldblquote generalized overlap\rdblquote , in which cloud overlap is assumed to be a linear combination of maximum and random overlap following {Hogan and Illingworth} (2000). Generalized overlap is defined as follows: let {{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ {\i C}\\s\\do5({\fs16 \i0\scaps0\b0\f0 max})={\plain max}({\i c}\\s\\do5({\fs16 {\i i}})\\,{\i c}\\s\\do5({\fs16 {\i j}}))}}{\fldrslt }}
} be the vertically projected cloud cover assuming maximal overlap due to two overlapped layers {{\i i}},{{\i j}} with partial cloud fractions {{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ {\i c}\\s\\do5({\fs16 {\i i}})\\,{\i c}\\s\\do5({\fs16 {\i j}})}}{\fldrslt }}
}, and let {{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ {\i C}\\s\\do5({\fs16 \i0\scaps0\b0\f0 ran})={\i c}\\s\\do5({\fs16 {\i i}})+{\i c}\\s\\do5({\fs16 {\i j}})\u8722?{\i c}\\s\\do5({\fs16 {\i i}}){\i c}\\s\\do5({\fs16 {\i j}})}}{\fldrslt }}
} be the vertically projected cloud cover assuming random overlap due to two overlapped layers. Then the true vertically projected cloud cover {{\i C}} is approximated by the generalized overlap {{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ {\i C}\\s\\do5({\fs16 \i0\scaps0\b0\f0 gen})}}{\fldrslt }}
}, where \par
\pard\plain\s11\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\tqc\tx3450\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \tab
{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ {\i C}\\s\\do5({\fs16 \i0\scaps0\b0\f0 gen})={\u945*}{\i C}\\s\\do5({\fs16 \i0\scaps0\b0\f0 max})+(1\u8722?{\u945*}){\i C}\\s\\do5({\fs16 \i0\scaps0\b0\f0 ran})}}{\fldrslt }}
\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 where {{\u945*}} is the overlap parameter that determines the weighting between maximal and random overlap. {Hogan and Illingworth} (2000) suggest that {{\u945*}} can be approximated as a decaying exponential function of the separation distance {{\u916*}{\i z}} between two layers, such that \par
\pard\plain\s11\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\tqc\tx3450\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \tab
{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ {\u945*}({\u916*}{\i z})={\plain exp} \\b (\u8722? \\F({\u916*}{\i z},{\i z}\\s\\do5({\fs16 0})))}}{\fldrslt }}
\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 where {{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ {\i z}\\s\\do5({\fs16 0})}}{\fldrslt }}
} is the \ldblquote e-folding\rdblquote  or \ldblquote decorrelation\rdblquote  length and describes the rate at which overlap changes from maximum to random.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 For heterogeneous hydrometeor fields, it has been suggested that the condensate overlap can be formulated in terms of a rank correlation {{\i r}} between layers that specifies the degree to which the distribution of condensate amounts in the two layers are lined up (e.g., {R{\'e4}is{\'e4}nen et\~al.}, 2004; {Pincus et\~al.}, 2005). Assuming a similar exponential dependence for {{\i r}} as for the cloud occurrence overlap {{\u945*}}, \par
\pard\plain\s11\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\tqc\tx3450\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \tab
{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ {\i r}({\u916*}{\i z})={\plain exp} \\b (\u8722? \\F({\u916*}{\i z},{\i z}\\s\\do5({\fs16 0\\,{\i q}})))}}{\fldrslt }}
\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 where {{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ {\i z}\\s\\do5({\fs16 0\\,{\i q}})}}{\fldrslt }}
} is the rank correlation for condensate between two layers separated by a distance {{\u916*}{\i z}}.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 This is a good start to the problem of improving the representation of unresolved cloud structure, but a number of challenges remain to implementing this in GCMs and in improving the subgrid treatment in COSP. {\par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 1.\tab
The decorrelation lengths need to be specified. Some models have already implemented this framework using a constant decorrelation length for occurrence overlap (e.g., {Donner et\~al.}, 2011), but observed decorrelation lengths have been shown to vary geographically and seasonally ({Hogan and Illingworth}, 2000; {Mace and Benson-Troth}, 2002; {Barker}, 2008). A more appropriate specification than constant values would be to parameterize decorrelation lengths in terms of the large-scale GCM fields, but this will require more work than has been done. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 2.\tab
In order to generate subcolumns with heterogeneous condensate, PDFs of condensate amount need to be specified. The trend toward statistical cloud schemes in GCMs (e.g, {Tompkins}, 2002; {Golaz et\~al.}, 2002) will hopefully provide these PDFs at some point. But this still leaves the problem of determining precipitation condensate, which is relevant to the simulated radar reflectivity. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 3.\tab
Precipitation overlap has not been considered, as this is typically not included in GCM radiative transfer parameterizations. Precipitation fraction, overlap, and variability are important for simulated radar reflectivity and this subgrid framework will need to be modified to include these effects. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 4.\tab
How to overlap condensate of different phases needs to be specified (cloud and precipitation). {{Di Michele} et\~al.} (2012) implement a simple method in which precipitation overlaps maximally with cloud. This is a good starting point for improving upon this problem. \par
}\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi300 Given this framework and the above remaining challenges, the following work is proposed to improve the representation of cloud and precipitation structure in GCMs and COSP diagnostics:\par
{\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Study hydrometeor structure in MMF output and in CloudSat data to determine relationships between decorrelation lengths and geophysical fields in GCMs. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Implement the {R{\'e4}is{\'e4}nen et\~al.} (2004) subcolumn generator into the COSP code to replace SCOPS, with modifications to include precipitation. Generalized overlap for cloud and precipitation occurrence and condensate with decorrelation lengths parameterized from above study using MMF output and CloudSat data. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Determine appropriate condensate PDFs to use in the absence of PDFs from statistical cloud schemes ({Oreopoulos et\~al.} (2012) suggest beta distribution or other skewed distributions). Study MMF output and CloudSat data to determine this. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Use the MMF to test the sensitivity of COSP diagnostics to specification and parameterization of decorrelation length scales. \par
}\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi300 The result of this work will be a parameterization of subgrid cloud and precipitation suitable for inclusion in traditional GCMs. Implementing this into a GCM is beyond the scope of this work but is a natural extension and next step.\par
\pard\plain\s3\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 4  Expected outcomes\par
{\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Quantitative evaluation of the performance of the MISR and ISCCP simulators in accounting for the limitations of the satellite retrievals. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Characterization of cloud and precipitation overlap statistics and condensate variability, and parameterization of these statistics suitable for implementation in a GCM \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Implementation of ({R{\'e4}is{\'e4}nen et\~al.}, 2004) subgrid generator into COSP code with extentions for improved treatment of precipitation. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Quantitative evaluation of the sensitivity of MISR, ISCCP, MODIS, CloudSat, CALIPSO simulator diagnostics to assumptions about unresolved cloud and precipitation structure and to improvements in that structure. \par
}\pard\plain\s3\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb300 \fi0 5  Timeline\par
{\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Autumn 2014: complete evaluation of MISR and ISCCP uncertainties. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Winter and Spring 2015: study MMF output and CloudSat data to characterize cloud and precipitation overlap parameters and condensate variability. Use MMF to parameterize these in terms of large-scale variables available in GCMs \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Summer 2015: Implement my improved subgrid cloud and precipitation generator into COSP code and test sensitivity of diagnostics to subgrid structure using MMF output; write and defend dissertation. \par
}{\pard\plain\s61\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb180 \fi0 {\plain\b\fs32 References}\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \li450\fi0 Barker, H.\~W., 2008: Overlap of fractional cloud for radiation calculations in {GCM}s: A global analysis using {CloudSat} and {CALIPSO} data. {\i J. Geophys. Res.}, {\b 113\~(D00A01)}, {10.1029/2007JD009677}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Barker, H.\~W., G.\~L. Stephens, and Q.\~Fu, 1999: The sensitivity of domain-averaged solar fluxes to assumptions about cloud geometry. {\i Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc.}, {\b 125\~(558)}, 2127\endash 2152, {10.1256/smsqj.55809}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Bodas-Salcedo, A., et\~al., 2011: {COSP}: Satellite simulation software for model assessment. {\i Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc.}, {\b 92\~(8)}, {10.1175/2011BAMS2856.1}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Bony, S. and J.-L. Dufresne, 2005: Marine boundary layer clouds at the heart of tropical cloud feedback uncertainties in climate models. {\i Geophys. Res. Lett.}, {\b 32\~(20)}, {10.1029/2005GL023851}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Bony, S., M.\~Webb, C.\~Bretherton, S.\~A. Klein, P.\~Seibesma, G.\~Tselioudis, and M.\~Zhang, 2011: {CFMIP}: Towards a better evaluation and understanding of clouds and cloud feedbacks in {CMIP5} models. {\i CLIVAR/EXCHANGES Newsletter}, in press.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Cess, R.\~D., et\~al., 1990: Intercomparison and interpretation of climate feedback processes in 19 atmospheric general circulation models. {\i J. Geophys. Res.}, {\b 95\~(D10)}, 16{\charscalex50\~}601\endash 16{\charscalex50\~}615, {10.1029/JD095iD10p16601}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 {Di Michele}, S., M.\~Ahlgrimm, R.\~Forbes, M.\~Kulie, R.\~B.\~M. Janiskov{\'e1}, and P.\~Bauer, 2012: Interpreting an evaluation of the {ECMWF} global model with {CloudSat} observations: ambiguities due to radar reflectivity forward operator uncertainties. {\i Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc.}, {\b 138}, 2047\endash 2065.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Donner, L.\~J., et\~al., 2011: The dynamical core, physical parameterizations, and basic simulation characteristics of the atmospheric component {AM3} of the {GFDL} global coupled model {CM3}. {\i J. Climate}, {\b 24\~(13)}, 3484\endash 3519, {10.1175/2011JCLI3955.1}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Geleyn, J.\~F. and A.\~Hollingsworth, 1979: An economical analytical method for the computation of the interaction of between scattering and line absorption of radiation. {\i Contrib. Atmos. Phys.}, {\b 52}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Golaz, J.-C., V.\~E. Larson, and W.\~R. Cotton, 2002: A {PDF}-based model for boundary layer clouds. part {I}: Method and model description. {\i J. Atmos. Sci.}, {\b 59\~(24)}, 3540\endash 3551, {10.1175/1520-0469(2002)059{<}3540:APBMFB{>}2.0.CO;2}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Hogan, R.\~J. and A.\~J. Illingworth, 2000: Deriving cloud overlap statistics from radar. {\i Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc.}, {\b 126}, 2903\endash 2909, {10.1256/smsqj.56913}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Kay, J.\~E., et\~al., 2012: Exposing global cloud biases in the {C}ommunity {A}tmosphere {M}odel ({CAM}) using satellite observations and their corresponding instrument simulators. {\i J. Climate}, {\b 25}, 5190\endash 5207, {{10.1175/JCLI-D-11-00469.1}}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Klein, S.\~A. and C.\~Jakob, 1999: Validation and sensitivities of frontal clouds simulated by the {ECMWF} model. {\i Monthly Weather Review}, {\b 127\~(10)}, 2514\endash 2531, {10.1175/1520-0493(1999)127{<}2514:VASOFC{>}2.0.CO;2}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Klein, S.\~A., Y.\~Zhang, M.\~D. Zelinka, R.\~Pincus, J.\~Boyle, and P.\~J. Gleckler, 2013: Are climate model simulations of clouds improving? an evaluation using the {ISCCP} simulator. {\i J. Geophys. Res.}, {\b 118\~(3)}, 1329\endash 1342, {doi:10.1002/jgrd.50141}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Mace, G.\~G. and S.\~Benson-Troth, 2002: Cloud-layer overlap characteristics derived from long-term cloud radar data. {\i J. Climate}, {\b 15}, {10.1175/1520-0442(2002)015{<}2505:CLOCDF{>}2.0.CO;2}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Mace, G.\~G., S.\~Houser, S.\~Benson, S.\~A. Klein, and Q.\~Min, 2010: Critical evaluation of the {ISCCP} simulator using ground-based remote sensing data. {\i J. Climate}, {\b 24\~(6)}, 1598\endash 1612, {10.1175/2010JCLI3517.1}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Mace, G.\~G. and F.\~J. Wrenn, 2013: Evaluation of the hydrometeor layers in the east and west pacific within {ISCCP} cloud-top pressure-optical depth bins using merged {CloudSat} and {CALIPSO} data. {\i J. Climate}, {\b 26}, 9429\endash 9444, {10.1175/JCLI-D-12-00207.1}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Mace, G.\~G., Q.\~Zhang, M.\~Vaughan, R.\~Marchand, G.\~Stephens, C.\~Trepte, and D.\~Winker, 2009: A description of hydrometeor layer occurrence statistics derived from the first year of merged {Cloudsat} and {CALIPSO} data. {\i J. Geophys. Res.}, {\b 114}, {10.1029/2007JD009755}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Marchand, R. and T.\~Ackerman, 2010: An analysis of cloud cover in multiscale modeling framework global climate model simulations using 4 and 1 km horizontal grids. {\i J. Geophys. Res.}, {\b 115}, {10.1029/2009JD013423}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Marchand, R., T.\~Ackerman, M.\~Smyth, and W.\~B. Rossow, 2010: A review of cloud top height and optical depth histograms from {MISR}, {ISCCP} and {MODIS}. {\i J. Geophys. Res.}, {\b 115}, {10.1029/2009JD013422}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Medeiros, B., B.\~Stevens, I.\~M. Held, M.\~Zhao, D.\~L. Williamson, J.\~G. Olson, and C.\~S. Bretherton, 2008: Aquaplanets, climate sensitivity, and low clouds. {\i J. Climate}, {\b 21\~(19)}, 4974\endash 4991, {10.1175/2008JCLI1995.1}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Oreopoulos, L., D.\~Lee, Y.\~C. Sud, and M.\~J. Suarez, 2012: Radiative impacts of cloud heterogeneity and overlap in an atmospheric {G}eneral {C}irculation {M}odel. {\i Atmos. Chem. Phys.}, {\b 12}, 9097\endash 9111, {10.5194/acp-12-9097-2012}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Pincus, R., H.\~W. Barker, and J.-J. Morcrette, 2003: A fast, flexible, approximate technique for computing radiative transfer in inhomogeneous cloud fields. {\i J. Geophys. Res.}, {\b 108\~(D13)}, {10.1029/2002JD003322}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Pincus, R., C.\~Hannay, S.\~A. Klein, K.-M. Xu, and R.\~Hemler, 2005: Overlap assumptions for assumed probability distribution function cloud schemes in large-scale models. {\i J. Geophys. Res.}, {\b 110\~(D15S09)}, {10.1029/2004JD005100}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Pincus, R., S.\~Platnick, S.\~A. Ackerman, R.\~S. Hemler, and R.\~J.\~P. Hofmann, 2012: Reconciling simulated and observed views of clouds: {MODIS}, {ISCCP}, and and the limits of instrument simulators. {\i J. Climate}, {\b 25}, 4699\endash 4720, {10.1175/JCLI-D-11-00267.1}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 R{\'e4}is{\'e4}nen, P., H.\~W. Barker, M.\~F. Khairoutdinov, J.\~Li, and D.\~A. Randall, 2004: Stochastic generation of subgrid-scale cloudy columns for large-scale models. {\i Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc.}, {\b 130}, 2047\endash 2067, {10.1256/qj.03.99}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Randall, D., M.\~Khairoutdinov, A.\~Arakawa, and W.\~Grabowski, 2003: Breaking the cloud parameterization deadlock. {\i Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc.}, {\b 84\~(11)}, 1547\endash 1564, {10.1175/BAMS-84-11-1547}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Stephens, G.\~L., et\~al., 2002: The {CloudSat} mission and the {A-Train}. {\i Bull. Amer. Meteorol. Soc.}, {\b 83\~(12)}, 1771\endash 1790, {10.1175/BAMS-83-12-1771}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Tompkins, A.\~M., 2002: A prognostic parameterization for the subgrid-scale variability of water vapor and clouds in large-scale models and its use to diagnose cloud cover. {\i J. Atmos. Sci.}, {\b 59}, 1917\endash 1942, {10.1175/1520-0469(2002)059{<}1917:APPFTS{>}2.0.CO;2}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Williams, K.\~D. and M.\~J. Webb, 2009: A quantitative performance assessment of cloud regimes in climate models. {\i Clim. Dyn.}, {\b 33\~(1)}, 141\endash 157, {10.1007/s00382-008-0443-1}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Winker, D.\~M., B.\~H. Hunt, and M.\~J. McGill, 2007: Initial performance assessment of {CALIOP}. {\i Geophys. Res. Lett.}, {\b 34\~(L19803)}, {10.1029/2007GL030135}.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Wu, X. and X.-Z. Liang, 2005: Radiative effects of cloud horizontal inhomogeneity and vertical overlap identified from a monthlong cloud-resolving model simulation. {\i J. Atmos. Sci.}, {\b 62}, 4105\endash 4112.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Zhang, M., et\~al., 2005: Comparing clouds and their seasonal variations in 10 atmospheric general circulation models with satellite measurements. {\i J. Geophys. Res.}, {\b 110\~(D15)}, {10.1029/2004JD005021}.\par
}}}
