This work would not have been possible without tremendous support from a great number of people. I thank my advisers, Tom Ackerman and Roger Marchand, for giving me the opportunity to study atmospheric science at UW, for all of their support and guidance throughout the (many) long years of my graduate work, and for teaching me to find my way as a scientist. I thank Rob Wood, Daehyun Kim, and Curtis Deutsch for serving on my Ph.D. committee, and Cecilia Bitz and Dargan Frierson for serving on my masters committee. A very special thanks is due to Jen Kay, for not only sponsoring me for a summer at NCAR, but for continuing to serve as a mentor and a supporter of my work ever since. I owe a great deal of graditude to many incredible teachers I have learned from, but especially to Stephanie Diemel at Shoreline Community College and to Brad Johnson at Western Washington University. I thank all of the friends I have made in the department, especially Stephen Po-Chedley, Stuart Evans, Aaron Donohoe, and Max Menchaca for all at one point sharing offices and numerous conversations about both science and life, and to all of Grads 08 for endless support and fun throughout our shared time at UW. I thank all of my friends outside the department, especially Mike Clawson, who has been my closest friend since as long as I can remember and even contributed science inspiration, enlightening discussions, and suggestions relevant to my graduate work. Most importantly, I thank my family for endless love, support, encouragement, and understanding throughout this whole journey, especially my parents Ed and Gretchen, my brother James, my nieces Lilli, Aria, and Scarlet, and my sweetheart Piper and her family; thank you all for supporting me and believing in me.
